discussion.tex:9:contained XXX lines. This also includes the test-bench enclosure,
discussion.tex:33:programs was quite straighforward. As also noted in \cite{xxx}, Balsa
implementation.tex:66:given in \cite{xxxcsbox}, but without pipelining. The matrix
implementation.tex:92:  as of this writing, not publicly available, kindly supplied by XXX
introduction.tex:23:with memory elements interspersed (XXX Figure!). The value of a memory
theory.tex:94:  \caption{Bundled data XXX}
theory.tex:154:single-rail \cite{xxx}.
theory.tex:207:Hazards are avoided by adding redundant gates XXX
theory.tex:218:\cite{xxx}: Functional testing, and structural testing.
theory.tex:276:circuit to deadlock, but also lead to a misbehaving circuit. XXX need
tools.tex:25:  \caption{Tangram design flow. Figure from \cite{fullscan}. XXX compare to TiDE}
tools.tex:47:Handshake circuits, first described in \cite{12, teakxxx}, consists of
tools.tex:64:There are multiple circuits implemented in Tangram/Haste. XXX list and
tools.tex:162:%% used in XXX. However, as shown in \cite[pp XXX]{sparso}, this is
tools.tex:165:%% language Communicating Sequentaial Processes (CSP)\cite{xxx}, based on
tools.tex:174:%% Tangram was used to create multiple circuiots: A XXX microprocessor,
tools.tex:175:%% low power smart card XXX, and showed the practical strengths of the
tools.tex:180:%% \cite{12,teakxxx}, based on a library of around 40 handshake
tools.tex:192:%% University \cite{xxx}, and released to the public domain under a GPLv2
tools.tex:196:%% Research have shown that handshake circuits uses little power\cite{xxx},
tools.tex:197:%% but also exhibits poor performance\cite{xxx}. Work has been done to
tools.tex:198:%% alleviate this\cite{xxx}, but the performance is still rougly half of
